Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricard Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Sudan Krishna Ryan. He
is associate professor in Political Science at a University
in Denmark. His research agenda seeks to understand and
explain political regime instability. And today we're going to
talk about democratic regimes, autocratic regimes, their instability and
stability and citizen support for democracy. So Doctor Krish
Krishna Rayan, welcome to the show. It's a big
pleasure to everyone.
Yeah. Thanks for, for having me and thank you
Ricardo for, for doing this show. I think it's
important that we disseminate our research to, to a
broad audience. Uh AND series like yours are a
vital part of this. So, so thank you as
well.
Well, thank you for the kind words and it's
my pleasure. So let me start by asking you
a basic question, I guess. So, from the perspective
of political science, what is democracy? I mean, how
does a political scientist define democracy?
Yeah, that's uh probably one of the, the toughest
questions to ask because there are almost as many
definitions of democracy as you have scholars of democracy,
people disagree heavily about what is democracy, how should
we define this very contested concept? Um I think
in its, in its broadest sense, you would argue
that democracy is ruled by the people, right? So
you and me, ordinary citizens, we decide who our
leaders are. Um But beyond this very general understanding,
people disagree heavily about what is democracy. Uh Right
now, there seems to be some kind of consensus
that we have to start somewhere. Uh And where
we start is usually with the most famous democracy
scholar Robert Dahl, who argues that democracy or poli
archy as he calls it consists of seven attributes,
you need seven attributes in a country before you
can call you self and electoral democracy. And those
seven are, first of all, you need control over
the government by elected officials. So you elect some
leaders and they could then run the government. That's
like the first criterion. Um Then you also need
free and fair elections obviously. So no cheating, no
unfair elections, it should be free and fair elections.
That's the second thing you need in the country.
You also need the third thing namely inclusive suffrage.
So all adults should be able to, to vote.
Uh And you also need the right to run
for office. That's 1/4 thing. So all adults should
be able to run for office if they wish
to do so. So there should be competition for,
for power. The fifth is that there should be
freedom of expression. So you should be able to
say whatever you want. No censorship. Uh AND it
should also be, this is the sixth freedom of
information. So you should be allowed to read any
books you want. What's the news you want? Uh
READ newspapers you want, there should be no blocking
of information. And finally you need freedom of association.
So if you're dissatisfied and you want to go
protest, you should be allowed to do that. So
this is what we agree on right now is
like the electoral core of democracy. If you don't
have these things, then you're not a democracy at
all, then you're an autocracy. But if you have
these seven attributes, then you would be called some
kind of electoral democracy, then you have like the
core attributes of what you could call a democracy.
This does not mean that you cannot become even
more democratic. So you could add different dimensions to
this core element of democracy. So for example, you
could add a liberal component, you could have uh
rule of law, you could have horizontal accountability, then
you would be a liberal democracy like Denmark, for
example, you could also improve your democracy in terms
of deliberation. So you could be better at discussing
politics among each other. Uh Then you would have
a more deliberative democracy. You would also have uh
improvements on the participatory dimensions. So more people engage
in democracy, more people engage in voting, in parties
and so on and so forth, then you have
a more participatory democracy. So the idea is that
you have this electoral core, the dials attributes on
which you can then add other elements to become
even more democratic. But most would agree that if
you don't have these electoral components, then you're not
in democracy. If you have them, then you have
the electoral components of what you would term democracy.
So I think this is where we have some
kind of consensus right now.
But aren't there uh a few countries? I mean,
first of all, perhaps I should ask you, is
are there any countries out there which fulfill all
of those criteria? And I if not, I mean,
aren't there perhaps a few countries that we still
consider democratic even though they do not perfectly uh
fulfill all of those criteria?
Yeah, I mean, we have many countries who fulfill
like Daal's criteria, the 71. BUT then when you
add even higher criterias, then it becomes fewer and
fewer countries, right? So there's like a, a reverse
trade off. So uh the more attributes you add
the less countries, what to these standards, right? Um
But in general you say that the world's most
democratic countries would be countries like Denmark, Sweden, Norway,
Finland, uh Ireland, Canada, uh countries like this generally
live up to many of these very high standards.
And then you have countries that have some defects
uh but are still very democratic. I mean, uh
UK the US uh Spain Italy, France, Germany who
are also very democratic countries but, but like some,
some of these attributes and then of course, you
have countries that are like close to being autocratic
uh where there's a debate. Is it auto autocracy
now? Is democracy? Uh I mean, Poland Hungary, Turkey,
India, you have these countries that are borderline between
autocracy and democracy. So you have like a whole
specter of countries where for some, you, you know,
these are democratic countries but for others, you, you
disagree some think they are some think they are
not. Um And then you clearly have some countries
that are clearly autocratic, right? North Korea, Syria countries
like that. So there's a spectrum of countries. Uh
SOME are more democratic than others and some we
disagree with uh among each other.
Yeah, I was just trying to understand if, for
example, a particular country does not uh have all
of those seven basic attributes. If we can still
uh consider it a democracy as I think we
do with some countries, right?
Yeah, I mean, so Dar Dar would say if
you don't have all seven, then you do not
live up to these standards, right? So take Turkey,
for example, I mean, uh many would take Dar's
criteria and say Turkey is no longer a democracy
because uh you don't have the freedom of information.
You don't have the freedom of expression, for example,
in Turkey right now. So they have moved from
being a democracy to being an autocracy now. Uh
So that's an example of a country that has
moved in the wrong direction in terms of DAS
attributes. So, so yeah, uh Dal would say you
need all seven before you can call yourself uh
uh what he calls poli achy, but this is
what we would term democracy in our conversation.
So when it comes to understanding uh how and
why people support democratic regimes and I will get
into that into how important is it, it is
for democracies to have the support of their own
citizens. But how do people form democratic support? Do
we know that?
Yeah, I mean, um it also differs in terms
of where you live, right? So if you take
old Western democracies, uh many people are just brought
up by, by democracy, right? They, they have been
internalized throughout their lives. That democracy is the only
game in town. Uh Democracy is the only correct
way to rule a country. Uh So many Western
democracies, democracy hold what we might term intrinsic value.
So it's good in itself. So no matter how
it performs, people think democracy is the only correct
way to govern a society. It's the only socially
accepted form of government basically in newer democracies, in
younger democracies, you don't have this internalization. So here
democracy is more uh instrumental in a way it
relies on performance legitimacy. So as long as it
performs well, people support it. But if it one
day stops performing, then people turn their backs to,
to democracy. So here it's more instrumental, it's a
lighter version of democratic support. So there's this difference
and it depends among other things on whether you
live in an old democracy, like in many Western
countries or whether you have just started living in
a democracy. So it depends on, on that among
other things.
So let me ask you about one specific factor
that might play a role here. Uh IS democratic
support influenced in any way by economic experiences in
early life.
Uh Yeah, in general, uh events in early life
are very important for, for your support for democracy.
Uh There are scholars who actually started this in,
in quite interesting projects, for example, as a scholar
from Glasgow and Ginor, together with other colleagues Finkel
and others who have a large project on this.
Uh And what they argue and what they find
is that there is some kind of nostalgia for
the good old days. So uh if you have,
if you're brought up during a period of autocracy,
it could be in Tunisia or Eastern Germany and
you now live in a democracy. Many people for
that generation actually think back on the good old
days when things were simpler, more stable, think back
to the autocratic days and actually long for that.
Uh um And you can find the same thing
just in reverse if you was brought up in
a democracy, now, live on autocracy. You could also
argue that it would be the same pattern. Uh
So basically, the idea is that people long back
to what they had during the childhood. If they
had a good experience with that, then they have
this nostri that, that sticks throughout their lives. So
your experiences ear early in your, in your childhood
in your young youth period are very important for,
for how you think about regimes later on in
your life. So there's definitely a close relationship here.
So if in your early years you live in
an autocracy, you can still long for uh going
back to it even though it might have had
certain issues.
Yeah. So, I mean, so the authors here, they
have tested this in Tunisia, for example. Uh Tunisia
is an interesting case because it was for long
uh an autocracy, right? And then after the Arab
Arab Spring, uh it became a democracy. Uh But
despite this, despite the freedoms that people certainly got
a large proportion of citizens actually long back to
the life they had uh back in the good
old autocratic days, not all, but that's a significant
part who thought this way. Uh So, so, yeah,
despite the fact that democracy brings something, uh uh
some people have this autocratic nostalgia um that we
should be aware of.
Mhm And with that in mind. Uh Of course,
people are worried about this or sometimes worry about
this. I, if uh people, citizens in western democracies
really do support democracy, do we know if they
do? What do we know about that?
Yeah. So, I mean, that's, that's a good question.
That's also what I research on these days. So
we, if you ask people directly, do you support
democracy? Uh Almost all say yes. Uh So almost
all say yes, I support democracy very much. Um
And I think they actually mean it, I think
it's in, especially in western democracies, it's in people's
core values to support democracy. Uh So people in
western democracies at least want to live in a
democracy, they want freedom, they want all the things
that come with living in a democracy. So people
mean it when they say yes, I support democracy,
but you also have to separate support for democracy
from satisfaction with democracy. Often these things get conflated
because you can easily on the one hand support
democracy and think this is the only way, only
good way to go on a society. And on
the other hand, be very dissatisfied with how it
actually works in your country. Um So you can
support democracy and be dissatisfied with how it works
in your country. You can easily have both intimates.
We need to be careful not to conflate these
two sentiments. Uh You can have one and also
have the other. Uh BUT if you talk about
support for democracy, then yes, during the last 50
years, if you ask people year after year, it's
very, very stable, very, very high. Most people in
western societies support democracy. We demand a lot from
democracy. We are becoming more and more critical. Uh
We hold it to higher, higher esteem. So we
want more and more from it and therefore many
get dissatisfied, but we support democracy. That's very clear.
We want to live in democracy, at least in,
in western societies.
But about the second point, you mentioned there about
people being satisfied or not with democracy. Do we
know anything about that? I mean, because even though
people uh say that they support democracy, do we
know if they are really satisfied with living in
a democratic regime or at least with certain practices
that they see occurring in democracy?
Yes. So that's the thing. So uh many are,
are dissatisfied with democracy but it's actually fewer than
we think. Uh If you look at the uh
the data, at least for Europe for the last
50 years in most countries, satisfaction with democracy goes
up actually. Uh But you don't hear much about
this because the media like to portray the negative
stories. That's the one that's the one people want
to read about and hear about. But it is
actually a positive story that satisfaction with democracy. Although
low in some countries is going up in most
places, we are getting more satisfied uh Despite what
we hear in mainstream media. So, so I think
that's always important to say that yes, democracy has
its problems. We need to keep improving it. We
need to take care of those who are not
satisfied with democracy. But it is a fact that
more and more people in most European democracies at
least are getting more satisfied with democracy. It might
be a different story in other places like in
us and, and in in more developing democracies, but
at least in Europe uh in most countries, people
are getting more satisfied, not less with the democracies.
And I think that's important also to mention.
So that, that's really interesting because many people worry
uh about the rise of certain extreme right wing
parties in certain European countries. And sometimes people point
to things like uh the 2008 economic crisis and
more recently, inflation and also the COVID pandemic and
all of that. And uh they say or suggest
that people uh are not, are no longer that
satisfied with democracy. But according to what you're saying,
across most, at least European countries, even with all
of that over time, people are saying that they
are more satisfied with democracy.
Actually, we saw a quite sharp dip after the
2008 crisis. So that's important to mention. So in
almost all countries, it went sharply down to 2008
and the following years. But now, given the recoveries
in most countries is rising again. So this is
so that's an important qualification to make that 2008
to 2011 12 was a sharp decline in satisfaction
with democracy across all, almost all countries. But we're
getting back to the level in most countries before
the crisis and actually beyond that level. Uh But
it's also important to say, I'm not saying that
there are no problems with democracies, right? I mean,
uh we citizens, we we do act uh in
inconsistent ways uh in many ways. So, so my
point here is that the problem is not lack
of support for democracy. The problem is not dissatisfaction
with democracy. The problem is that we as ordinary
citizens are quite inconsistent with our democratic values. So
as I said, when we are asked directly to
support democracy, then we say yes, but when we
then have to act on this, then we are
quite inconsistent. Um uh The scholars who started this
in a very nice way. Uh The two scholars
from Yale, uh Matt Graham and Milan Soli who,
who in a quite forceful uh high contribution article
showed that people are very inconsistent in terms of
the democratic values. Um And what you should try
to imagine here is uh try imagine that your
politician or your party uh is acting undemocratically. So
you have your party, your politician, he or she
gives you all the policies, you want, you get
taxes, you want, you get the social spending, you
want, you get the immigration policy, you want, you
get the health care, you want, you get the
climate policy, you want, you get everything you want
politically. However, this party of yours is acting undemocratically,
he's violating core democratic rules and norms. Would you
then in this situation, vote for the opposition, would
you reject your party and vote for the opposition?
You should, if you are a Democrat, right? Like
small d Democrat, if you, if you really believe
in democracy, you should punish your party despite all
the politics you get and vote for the opposition.
But the thing is very few will do this.
When push comes to show we are not willing,
at least most are not willing to punish our
parties because we are partisans first and Democrats only
second. So when politics conflict with democracy, then politics
win. And this is a problem in our society
is that we do support democracy, we do, we
are pretty satisfied with it. But when it clashes
with other values like political values, then politics wins.
And this is the problem uh in many Western
democracies that when push comes to show we are
not willing to act consistently on our democratic values.
We are likely to, to put all our values
above democracy, for example, getting the politics we want.
And this is one of the reasons why undemocratic
politicians can get away with it because their voters
don't punish them because politics is more important for
most.
So, that's one of the main reasons why sometimes
people support undemocratic behavior.
Yeah, definitely. So, uh, if Trump does something, uh,
well then, uh, Trump voters, they, they will just
accept it because, uh, they, they will never vote
for the Democrats. Politics is more important for them
than, than, uh, getting the democracy. Right. Uh, AND
this goes for both sides. It's not just a
right wing thing. Uh It's both on the left
and the right. We are willing to uh accept
undemocratic behavior from our politicians as long as we
get the policies we want because that's more important
for us. Um And that's one of the main
challenges in in western democracies. Um And then people
can ask, so how can people live with themselves?
How can they cope with this situation? Right? Uh
And people have many coping mechanisms to, to accept
that they do what they do. Um And a
lot of research have examined how people actually deal
with this tense situation. It must be to accept
an undemocratic politician. Uh If I should just mention
41 reason would be simply the people acknowledge, yes,
I'm supporting an undemocratic candidate, but this candidate or
this party gives me the policies I want. So
you just do it with open eyes, you just
accept that politics is more important for you than
democracy. That's one way to, to cope with this
just to do it with, with eyes wide open
a second opportunity. A possibility is to rationalize what
you mean by democracy and non democracy. So this
is what I do in my research. So what
I find is that when people are confronted with
undemocratic behavior from their side, so again, imagine your
party or your politician acting undemocratically, then most people
will actually just argue that this is not undemocratic.
They rationalize, they tell themselves that this behavior that
objectively might be undemocratic. They convince themselves that this
is not undemocratic. It, it follows all democratic rules
and norms. So they are not uh selling democracy
to get policy. They're actually getting both democracy and
politics because it's not undemocratic. So they keep simply
rationalized and tell themselves that a certain undemocratic behavior
is perfectly democratic. A third way is to accept
that yes, I am supporting uh an undemocratic candidate,
but I'm not voting for the opposition because they
will be even worse. Uh If I vote for
the opposition, then they would violate democracy even more
and then democracy is doomed. So I support my
candidate despite his or her flaws because the other
side would be even more undemocratic. It would be
even worse for democracy. So I'm kind of saving
democracy by sticking to my candidate. That's the third
way people cope with this by telling themselves that
the other side is worse. 1/4 and final way
they can cope with. This is by uh telling
themselves that democracy is very strong. I mean, at
least in western democracies, people don't think many don't
think that their democracies can break down. I mean,
they've been used to living in democracy for their
whole lives so they don't know how fragile democracy
is in reality. Uh So by telling yourself that
democracy is strong, uh you can easily accept supporting
one or two undemocratic candidates, right? It doesn't matter.
Uh DEMOCRACY will, will stay despite the fact that
you vote for this undemocratic candidate. Uh So that's
like the fourth way to cope with this situation
is by telling yourself that democracy can with uh
withstand these candidates without any problems. Democracy is strong
voting once or twice for this candidate does not
make a difference. So, so there are many coping
mechanisms, these are just four of them, but uh
they show how people can uh live with themselves
despite the fact that they vote for un democratic
candidates from time to time. So
people are good at rationalizing their inconsistent positions to
democracy.
Yeah, there are many ways to, to do so.
Yeah.
So uh it's one thing for people to support
democracy and be satisfied or not with it to
different degrees. But uh one thing that uh some
people also suggest is for us to try to
intervene and improve citizens democratic values. I mean, is
it possible to do that? At least from a
scientific perspective. Are there any evidence-based interventions out there?
Uh There are few, but we don't know much
about this right now. So we are slowly getting
the diagnosis. Right. Right. So we are slowly understanding
what the problem is. Uh But we are very,
it's very early days for the intervention research. Uh
It's right now, people are trying to work on
this, trying to find out. So what can we
do about it? How can we make people not
vote for democratic candidates? How can we make people
stick to the democratic core values? Um uh So
we don't know much about it right now. Uh
We know a bit and I can explain that
to you. So one thing we can do at
least on the long term, uh it's education, right?
So back to the and Neo and Finkel and
those uh those guys in that team, they show
that civic education, democracy, education actually works. Uh You
can educate people in understanding democracy, valuing democracy uh
preferably at an early age in their lives. And
that actually works in terms of getting people to
become more democratic later in life. Uh This is
like the long term intervention, right? Uh We can
also do something on the short term now and
here. Uh But this is where we really don't
know much. Uh For example, there's this quite impressive
mega study done by a team from Stanford University.
Uh uh Wil Robb Willer and colleagues, what they
did is that they acknowledged that we don't know
anything about this. So they invited scholars, ordinary citizens
practitioners to submit intervention suggestions to them. Uh They
got more than 400 then they chose the 25
best or most promising interventions and tried to test
them in the real world or test them in,
in a big online sample of uh representative sample
of Americans to see which of these 25 interventions
worked. Unfortunately. Uh So almost all of these interventions
worked in all the outcomes. They worked in terms
of reducing polarization, for example. So that's great but
almost non worked in terms of improving democratic norms,
almost non worked in terms of making people stick
to democracy uh and reject on democratic behavior. Uh
So that's a sad story, a sad part of
it. And it shows that we know very little
about this. Um There were two interventions that worked.
Uh ONE that worked was by telling people or
by like correcting the misbelief about the other side.
So telling them that the other side is not
worse. So as I told before, this is one
of the coping mechanisms, we support undemocratic behavior because
we think the other side is worse and therefore
we stick to our candidate. But this is not
the case. I mean, the other side is not
worse. Uh This, these are the facts that show
this. So uh our political opponents are not more
undemocratic than we are. They are as democratic and
like democracy as much as we do. And if
people are being told this, if people are being
told that the other side is not worse, they
love democracy as much as you do, then you
yourself become less willing to support undemocratic behavior. Um
And that actually works. So that's an intervention that
works to, to tell people that uh we all
appreciate to live in democracy and therefore we should
stick to it. So by telling that the other
side is not worse, you yourself become less uh
undemocratic in a sense. Another intervention that worked uh
uh is related to the the last force coping
mechanism, namely this idea that democracy is strong and
and not fragile because what they did here is
that they showed a, a bunch of videos to
respond. Uh A bunch of videos showing democracies in
trouble. So democracy being attacked by coups, uh January
6th footage uh stuff like that. So showing a
lot of videos of democracies in troubles. Uh AND
what this had an effect was that it showed
that democracies are not immune to these kind of
troubles, it could happen in your country. And after
watching these videos, the treatment group were less willing
to support violations of democracy compared to the control
group. So it also worked in terms of improving
our democratic norms. So these are like the two
interventions so far we know works but apart from
this, we know very little about how we can
make people stick to the democratic values. So we
need to do more research and maybe in one
or two years, uh I can tell you more
about this.
Yeah. Uh But do you have any idea about
exactly what kind of research we would need specifically
and what kind of knowledge we, we would need
to have when it comes to developing more and
better science based interventions to improving uh citizens, democratic
values.
Yeah. So I personally, I think we should focus
on the coping mechanisms, right? So we need to
take them one at a time and say, OK,
how do people cope with the fact that they
support on democratic candidates? And then we should try
to block these coping mechanisms, right? So those two
that worked, worked in terms of one of these
four coping mechanisms I showed you. So that would
be my suggestion to start with how do people
overcome this dilemma and then try to block that
ability to overcome that dilemma. So they have to
reject our democratic behavior because we want people to
act democratically, right? Uh I think that's one way
another way is also to acknowledge that this is
not a fringe phenomenon. We have this idea that
those citizens who do this are on the flanks.
Like I say, extreme citizens on the right wing
or extreme left. These are the people we need
to educate, right? But research showed that this is
you and me, I mean, ordinary citizens, uh we
all do this from time to time. We all
have these biases inherent in us. So we shouldn't
think that this is something other people do. We
do it ourselves. We need to acknowledge that this
is a mass phenomenon we like if not all,
then most of us are inconsistent when push comes
to show and we need to acknowledge this. So
intervention should be aimed at the broad population, not
just those on the fringes, you could easily think
that. And then yeah, we need uh clear control
treatment trials. Uh So what people do right now
is online surveys. I think we should, we need
more of that. So we have a control group
and then we have a treatment group who undergo
one kind of treatment. So it could be watching
a video or, or reading some kind of information
or, or doing something else and then to see
the effects compared to the control group. So we
need more of that kind of studies in order
to be smart on this very important topic.
So uh uh when it comes to people satisfaction,
satisfaction with democracy, I would like to ask you
one specific question. So uh do we know if
national elections are unequivocally good for that? For people's
satisfaction with democracy?
That's a good question because uh uh one solution
many people suggest is to make citizens participate more
on democracy. There's this idea that the more participation,
the better. Uh BUT I'm not sure this is
the right way to go and you see this
with national elections because it, it all depends on
the experiences you have when you participate in the
democratic process, if you have good experiences, then that
sentiment sticks in the years to come and you
become more satisfied with democracy. If you had bad
experiences, last time you participated in the democratic process,
then that bad sentiment sticks and you get more
dissatisfied with democracy and you see this with the
elections. So if your last election took place during
uh uh economic growth period, then you are more
satisfied with democracy in the years to come regardless
of how the economy performs afterwards. On the other
hand, last time you went to the polls, if
there was a period of economic crisis and you
had a bad experience that day, you, you had
bad sentiment when you participate in democracy, then that
bad feeling sticks in the years to come again,
regardless of how the economy performs. So it all
depends, it depends on whether you had good or
bad experiences. Last time you participated in the democratic
process and that sentiment is likely to stick until
next time you, you go vote for example. So,
so it all depends.
Uh YOU mentioned economic crisis there and earlier in
our conversation, uh I brought to the table the
2008 economic crisis very briefly. So why is it
that sometimes economic crisis lead to democratic breakdown and
sometimes they don't.
Yeah. So economic crisis is probably one of the
most destabilizing events we know of uh in terms
of regime stability. Uh AND one of the reasons
is at least in, in, in many places around
the world, people want basic necessities, right? I mean,
they want to have a job, they want to
be able to provide for the families, they want
to uh have a decent living basically. And during
an economic crisis, these things are, are threatened, you
might lose your job, you might not be able
to put food on the table to provide for
your family. And when that happened, you turn your
anger towards the regime and it goes both ways,
both for autocracies and democracies. Uh YOU get dissatisfied
and maybe you even will challenge the regime. Maybe
you go to the street in a protest or
at least you don't do anything if others try
to topple the regime. So economic crisis are perhaps
the most destabilizing events because it makes people very
angry and very dissatisfied with whatever regime they have.
Mhm. And what other factors apart from economic crisis?
Explain democratic breakdown.
Yes, I mean, uh age I think is uh
perhaps one of the strongest expenditure factors. So the
older the democracy, the more stable it is the
younger the democracy, the more unstable and more likely
to break down. It is uh so regime stability
take many years to, to kind of build up.
Um uh A good example is uh the interwar
period. So the period between the 1st and 2nd
World War, uh so at the end of the
first world war, almost all countries in Europe were
democracies. When the second world war started, half of
the continent's democracies broke down. So it's a very,
very neat laboratory to understand why some democracies broke
down while others didn't. And what we see here
is that all those countries, all those democracies that
were democracy prior to First World War. So we
could call them relatively old democracies. They all survived
without exception, all those who broke down were new
democracies. So countries that only became democracy after first
World war, Germany, uh Italy, Spain uh countries like
that. Um um Not to say that all young
democracies broke down. We had some young democracies who
survived uh Finland, for example. Uh But it is
a very, very strong relationship. Um So the age
of democracy or autocracy is very important, the older
you are, the more stable you are basically. Um
So that's uh that's important to know. Uh Then
of course, economic crisis as we talked about. Uh
BUT having a stable party system and strong civil
society is also a good thing if you want
a stable democracy. Um And then I think it's
also important to mention external influence. So uh if
you are in a democratic neighborhood, if you have
a good democratic superpower next to you, that also
makes your country more democratic. Uh On the other
hand, if you have like an autocratic superpower next
door, like like China or Russia, then it's much
harder for you all to say, sustain your democracy
because then you have this autocratic influence coming every
day constantly from this autocratic superpower. So geography and
international factors also matters a lot in terms of
your survival chances.
So just a second ago, when I asked you
about the effects of economic crisis, you also mentioned
there that even in autocracies, they can sometimes lead
to regime instability. So, but what happens specifically when
autocratic leaders are exposed to economic crisis or how
do they deal with it?
Yes, in many ways, it's kind of the same
scenario, right? I mean, uh if an autocracy is
experiencing crisis, they also face dissatisfaction from their citizens
because they want the same thing. Uh People still
want bread on the table to provide for the
families a decent job. Uh So they also get
the same challenges. Uh Often it is in different
ways because autopsies are better at uh uh suppressing,
at least tough autopsies are better at suppressing the
center from below. Uh uh But perhaps they are
more vulnerable to other types of breakdowns like coups,
for example. So historically, coups has been the number
one way to, to topple many, many regimes around
the world. Uh So the leaders removed from by
the military or all those within the state. So
the point is they are also vulnerable during times
of economic crisis, but they can also shield themselves.
I mean, democracies don't break down every time there's
a crisis and likewise, autocracies don't break down every
time there's a crisis, they can shield themselves. For
example, if they have natural resources, uh oil, uh
diamonds, stuff like that, then they ensure this constant
flow of money despite being in an economic crisis.
And if they have this constant flow of money,
then they can still pay off the core supporters
of the regime and stay stable despite the crisis.
So some autocracies are very stable despite the fact
that they might have a crisis, especially if they
have other sources of income, natural resource being one
of the most important ones.
Mhm. So, I mean, when it comes to shielding
themselves from, for example, revolutions, coups and assassination attempts,
it's um uh many times a matter of having
enough resources to do it.
Yeah. Yeah, exactly. And preferably resources that are unrelated
to the broad society. So no matter whether you're
having a crisis or not, you'll get your oil
income, right? I mean, uh oil country still need
to buy the oil. So it's relatively unrelated to
an economic crisis where you get your oil income
or not. Uh So having this source of income
that is unrelated to the broader societal economy, that's
preferable as an autocrat because then you ensure a
stable inflow of money that you can use to
pay off your key supporters uh during this tough
time. So that's a very important shield.
OK. So Doctor Krishna Rayan, uh just before we
go, uh I, I mean, e even before I
ask you, where can people find you on the
internet? Would you like to tell us what are
you working on at the moment and what work
you will be doing in the near future?
Yes, I'm actually working on this intervention aspect. As
I said, we don't know much about what can
we do about this situation, right? In democracies, especially
in western democracies, the fact that people are very
inconsistent, they say they value democracy, but then they
still support undemocratic candidates and many does. So how
can we intervene and prevent this from happening? So
this is what I'm working on right now. Uh
And this very early days also in my research,
so I don't have any concrete results right now,
perhaps in a year or two. But I'm also,
I've also jumped into this question right now because
I think it's one of the most uh important
and vital questions to ask uh in democracies today,
how can we help people? How can we empower
people to resist undemocratic behavior? So this is what
I do right now.
OK. And where can people find your work on
the internet.
Uh I mean, I have my web page student
dot DK. Uh So it's just my name dot
DK so that uh uh that should be straightforward.
I have all my papers articles in there. Um
And then also at the conferences, uh I'm going
to, to Glasgow for IP S A conference uh
uh in June. Uh So, yeah, there, I'm also
available. Um I write me an email.
Ok, great. I will be leaving uh links to
your work in the description box of this interview.
Uh And thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It was really
fun to talk to you and hopefully somewhere in
the future you can come back to the show
to talk about your uh current work. So
thank you, Ricardo.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please do not
forget to like it, share, comment and subscribe. And
if you like more generally, what I'm doing, please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal. You
have all of the links in the description of
this interview. The show is brought to you by
en lights learning and development done differently. Check their
website at alights.com. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters per Larson Jerry Mueller and Frederick Sunda
Bernards, all of Election and visor Adam Castle Matthew
Whitting, whitting bear. No wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric, Alania,
John Connors Philip Forrest, Connelly, Robert Winde Ruin. Nai
Zoup, Mark Nevs Colin Holbrook, Simon Columbus, Phil Cavanagh,
Michael Stormer, Samuel Andreev for Alexander Dan Bauer, Fergal
Ken Hall, her OG Michel, Jonathan Libra Jars and
the Samuel K, Eric Heins, Mark Smith, Jan We
Amal Sran David Sloan Wilson, Yasa, Des Roma Roach
Die Janick Punter, Da Man, Charlotte, Bli, Nicole Barbar,
Wam and Pao Assy Naw guy Madison, Gary GH.
Some of the Adrian Nick golden Paul talent in
Ju Bar was Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Bronner,
Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lotti Gabrielle Pan Cortez, Lalit
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith, John Wiesman,
Martin Ackland, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul George Arnold
Luke Lo A George the off Chris Williamson, Peter
Lawson, David Williams Di Costa, Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Chao and M Martinez Chevalier. Bangalore atheists. Larry
Daley Junior, Holt Eric B. Starry Michael Bailey, then
Sperber Robert Grassy Rough the RP MD. Ior Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radix, Mark Campbell, Richard Bowen
Thomas the Dauber Luke Ni and Chris story, Manuel
Oliveira, Kimberly Johnson and Benjamin Gilbert. A special thanks
to my producers. This is our web gem Frank
Luca, Tom Weam Bernard Eni Ortiz Dixon Benedict Mueller
Vege Gli Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carlo Montenegro, Robert Lewis and Al Nick Ortiz. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Serge Adrian and
Bogdan Kut. Thank you for all.